[Intro] Today we are in the middle of a triple planetary crisis. In addition to climate change, biodiversity is threatened as species are going extinct at an alarming pace, and contaminants from human activities are giving rise to increased negative effects on the environment. Shipping contributes negatively to the development of all these three topics. More than 80% of all goods are at some point transported by ship. At the same time, shipping is responsible for 3% of the global carbon dioxide emissions. In addition, there are many other types of pressures from shipping, with direct, detrimental effects on the marine environment.

 
[Biofouling] Small organisms colonizing the hull, so called biofouling, is a severe problem that can both spread alien species and increase the drag and thereby the fuel consumption of the ship. Even a few millimeters of growth can give rise to tens of percents of increased fuel consumption. Hence, it is essential to try to minimize the problem, but it is unfortunate that most ships today are painted with toxic antifouling paints.
 

[Antifouling] In the Baltic Sea, for example, antifouling paints constitute the largest individual source of copper to the marine environment and shipping accounts for more than one third of the total copper input to the area. Ongoing research at Chalmers University of Technology is showing that nontoxic antifouling paints can be at least as efficient as copper paints, yet it takes time to change the current practices within the shipping industry.


[Ship strikes] In many areas, the major shipping lanes overlap with whale migration routes, increasing the risk of ship strikes, and leading to whale injuries or deaths, and well as vessel damage. Collisions also often go unnoticed and unreported. 


[Propeller] Underwater radiated noise, primarily from propeller cavitation, is considered a type of energy pollution. It is challenging to regulate, but there are ongoing efforts to design more silent (and efficient) ships, and to identify thresholds of maximum allowed noise in different marine environments.

Furthermore, most ships use oil for propeller shaft lubrication, which implies a constant leakage of these oils that often are more toxic than fuel oils.
 

[Anchor] Even ships at anchor are giving rise to pressures, not only from the scouring of the seafloor, but also significant underwater noise when deploying and retrieving the anchor. During anchorage many of the onboard systems are still running, implying that there will be, for example, exhaust emissions, also from a ship at anchor.
 

[Tank cleaning] In the world of chemicals and plastics that we are currently living in, chemical tankers play an essential role in transporting different chemicals in bulk. When changing cargo, the tanks need to be washed and often the washing is made at sea, implying that residues of the cargo itself and cleaning agents are washed overboard. In the Baltic Sea tank cleaning of mineral oil is prohibited, yet the increased demand of biofuels for land transport lead to increased volumes being transported worsening the issue of tank cleaning discharges at sea. Even if biofuels are less toxic than petroleum products, they can have the same severe effects on birds feather plumes.

 
[Sewage] Another environmental pressure is related to the people onboard, crew and passengers, giving rise to waste. Black water or sewage, and grey water from sinks, shower, laundry and kitchen are mixtures of organic matter, nutrients and cleaning agents. Following decades of debate, especially on cruise ships’ discharge of sewage, there are today regulations in place with respect to black water. However, grey water is still unregulated, unless it is being mixed with black water prior to discharge. An emerging concern of grey water discharge is the content of microplastics being discharged to the marine environment. Finally, there is also some solid waste, such as food waste being grinded and thrown overboard.


[Scrubbers] Exhaust gas cleaning systems, also known as scrubbers, are used to comply with the global regulations to limit sulfur oxide emissions from ships. While cleaning the emissions to air, unfortunately, the scrubbers produce large volumes, typically 500-1000 cubic meters per hour, 24/7, of heavily polluted wash water. The discharge water is very acidic, about pH3, and is a highly toxic cocktail of e.g. metals and organic pollutants.

 
[Outro] This has been an overview of a few, common, types of pressures and impacts caused by commercial shipping today. Many of the systems are regulated individually, primarily through by the International Maritime Organization. Many also contain the same sort of stressors, but they are not assessed in a holistic way by the shipping regulations. This is a knowledge gap that urgently needs to be closed.

Finally, some good news. The Swedish Agency for Marine and Water Management is currently undertaking a governmental investigation on how to reduce the negative impact of shipping, with a focus on birds and porpoises in the Baltic Sea. This is a first step in the right direction. In July 2026, two large research project have also been launched, aiming at better connecting the environmental impact of shipping and marine spatial planning. Stay tuned for more information!
